A spaceship. The next breakthrough in car ownership came about as a result of the government's
privatisation programme, where my regional electricity company was floated as a PLC,
that is Public Limited Company. Along with personal contracts, new job titles and share
options, the previously restricted list of approved manufacturers was expanded to include
other European carmakers. This was eagerly embraced by managers in the company and soon
our car park was filling up with gleaming new BMWs and bottom of the range Mercedes.
Neither of these appealed to me, but at last a company van was possible, or more correctly
an MPV in the form of a Renault Espace. This was the Mark 2 Espace and to my mind an improvement
over the boxy first attempt. Certainly the load carrying ability was very attractive apart from
anything else, but this car was to provide new levels of auto equipment to my car ownership.
Remote central locking with an alarm, air conditioning, essential with all the glass,
a decent stereo with a multi-CD player and controls on the stalk for the driver,
seven seats and a number of permutations. It was even possible to swivel the two front seats
around to face the two at the very back with a single seat folded down in the middle to form a table.
The new car must have for some reason was cup holders and he had lots of these.
The Espace was my first car equipped with air conditioning, common in cars nowadays,
but much rarer then and the Espace had a particularly powerful unit. I was delighting
putting it down to the coldest setting and putting the fan on full and it was possible
to see people's breath condensing and getting them shivering when I would innocently inquire
whether it was cool enough yet. The load carrying was tested early on when I discovered that the
data centre at work had loads of clean wooden pallets to dispose of and by removing all the
five rear seats I could bring home seven or eight of these to construct giant compost bins in the
garden, most useful. The car had a two litre injection engine with anti-lock braking systems
and despite its size was relatively light so gave a spirited performance for such a big vehicle of
that era. Some of this was down to the so-called space age composite body panels, probably some
kind of plastic I guess. It would be good to be able to say that all this sophisticated European
design meant that the car was reliable and a joy to own and drive and it was apart from one
memorably scary incident where this car appeared to be taken over by evil spirits.
Returning to Sussex along the Eastbound M4 one evening after a work trip I was rather
shocked to see all the warning lights on the dashboard starting to flash on and off
randomly. I quickly pulled over onto the hard shoulder and turned off the ignition.
I was just about to restart it and hope that the warning lights would go out when the engine
started itself. I took the key out of the ignition and got out grabbing my coat and briefcase.
Standing beside it holding the ignition key I was mystified that the engine was still running.
Then I had a brainwave and used the remote control ignition key to lock the car calculating that the
immobiliser would cut the ignition which it did but for some reason the alarm then went off.
Pressing the key to unlock it only took a few seconds before the engine started itself again.
I'm standing outside holding the ignition key. I know that today using remote apps it's now
possible to start your engine remotely and even drive a car remotely into a parking space
but this technology wasn't to my knowledge available in the mid 1990s unless I had unbeknownst
to me been provided with some advanced future car technology testbed by Renault. So it was a choice
car locked engine off but alarm going or alarm off and the engine running. Luckily my company
mobile phone had been upgraded from an in-car model to one that could be removed and worked
outside so I rang the RAC which we had membership of through the company. They took the details of
the last junction I remembered passing and told me to wait away from the car and asked if I noticed
any burning smells or smoke. There might have been some rubber on the road either from me stopping or
me sprinting from the car but I avoided mentioning this. They warned me the response time could be
over an hour and that the fire brigade might attend as it sounded electrical. I was tempted
to suggest calling Ghostbusters then remembered they were fictional. So I sat up on the grass
bank and phoned home and explained yes I was likely to be delayed and yes the car alarm was ours but
if I switched it off I was fearful of the car driving itself away. I was tempted to open up the
car again and switch on all the electrics to try and run down the car battery as quickly as possible
and shut off the alarm but in truth having explained the bizarre symptoms three times
including twice to the RAC I'm not sure believe me at the first telling I was now a little scared
of the car and fairly wary of going near it. It was quite a pleasant spring evening and could have
been quite peaceful sitting above the quiet motorway were it not for the insistent car alarm.
This was soon drowned out though unfortunately by a fire engine siren which was coming from a full
size fire engine as it roared up and stopped behind the possessed car. It escorted several
firemen two in suits with breathing apparatus and one without asking for the keys and trying to
understand what I was saying over the double noise of the alarm and the siren which they
haven't switched off. Once the car was unlocked they went to open the bonnet but of course the
engine started which certainly startled the fireman who was about to stick his arm in the engine
despite me explaining about the problem. So we went through the lock in the car to stop the engine
routine and then shouted at each other over the alarm which thankfully was no longer accompanied
by their siren. This was now silent maybe because having now had enough excitement from having a
limb potentially removed they decided to calm things down a bit. One fireman disconnected the
battery while he came over to tell me this his colleague would appear to still be enjoying his
own adrenaline rush as he filled the engine compartment with foam from a fire extinguisher,
a large one. I was now past caring so I wished them a thanks and goodbye and waited for the RIC
recovery vehicle. I was hoping it would arrive before dark as I couldn't put the car's lights on.
Remembering there was a breakdown triangle in the boot I cautiously walked 50 yards back down the
hard shoulder and put that up as a precaution. Thankfully the RIC man arrived before sunset and
a couple of hours later I was dropped off home with the car being collected by an apologetic
mechanic from the Renault dealer. The car was taken away for another low loader trip and I
was left with a replacement car which hopefully was less autonomous. Some days later the sales
manager rang up full of apologies and the usual excuse that this has never happened before to his
knowledge allowing me to say that that was of little comfort to me as it had happened in every
Renault Espace that I'd owned and I was not impressed. Upon return of the errant car it was
explained to me that the wiring loom had been completely replaced as it was too tight passing
into the engine bay from behind the dashboard and there was a suspicion of a rubber insulating grommet
that had been missed. This had frayed, shortened the wiring and luckily had not caused a fire.
It was a little while before I trusted the car enough to be good friends again.
Ford again. When it was time to replace the Renault the company allowed us to do this every three
years. It was always an opportunity to try something else and at somebody else's expense the risk
always seemed minimized. We got used to the space flexibility and higher driving position of the
Espace so we looked around for an alternative in the range that had come to be called people carriers.
A ridiculously redundant term as surely this was a feature of all cars and other vehicles nevertheless
the market for these was growing in popularity and Ford had joined the market with a joint
development with Volkswagen, the Ford Galaxy and the VW Charon. Now call me old-fashioned but I
didn't fancy owning a Charon or even a Charan, no offense it's a lovely name but at least the
Galaxy shares its title as something astronomical and a chocolate bar. In any event the Ford has
better value in my allowed price range probably because the company bought a lot more Ford vehicles
mostly transit vans than they bought VWs. I don't know or maybe it was a badge premium
exercised by the German company as the models are virtually identical.
The car was to be a Galaxy 2.0-litre gear and petrol as it was the early days of the ill-judged
let's all move to more economical and greener diesel engines. What a cul-de-sac that has turned
out to be. As cars were becoming more alike in appearance and some of this was down to
aerodynamics and drag coefficients it was not easy to select them based on brand. In fact a friend
who was also entitled to a company car claimed to select his on two important criteria.
How comfortable the driver's seat was, he drove all over the country in parts of
mainland Europe and secondly how easy it was to operate the sound system and how loud it was.
I'm sure this simplified things when he was not seduced by issues of branding and design.
I'm not so single-minded and swayed by the upmarket luxury features of the Ford gear model,
that's what the brochure said. I selected a metallic maroon model but let's be realistic
here it's basically a van with more windows and stuff full of thick carpet and six armchairs
in a hideously grey patterned velour that could have come from the DFS novo bilious range.
It was well equipped with the so-called luxuries including electric sunroof, six electric windows,
CD multiplayer, heated front windscreen, climate control, rear heater controls and enough map
reading and courtesy lights to equip a Christmas tree amongst other refinements. It was impossible
to order a 12-volt small fridge that clipped in place of one of the rear seats so we had one of
those as an extra and very civilised it was too for picnics. Mechanically it was a two-litre
double overhead camshaft Ford petrol engine with ABS and traction control and described by
Ford's marketing department as providing lively performance with impressive economy.
The power output was an increase over the Renault 115bhp against 105 but the Ford was considerably
heavier at kerb weight. What is that? It was 1650kg to the lighter Renault's 1320kg.
The lively performance of 12 seconds to 0-60 and 110 top speed doesn't sound so impressive by
modern standards today but despite its weight it was livelier than the Espace that claimed a 0-60
at 13.5 seconds. The extra weight did make it feel more solid and stable but maybe it was the arm
rest on the seats that helped with that. I've always felt the Renault could use more power
and some lunatic of Renault agreed but maybe went a little too far. To celebrate the 10th
anniversary of Renault's Formula One involvement the Espace F1 show car was developed using a
carbon fibre reinforced body and a chassis. A three and a half litre V10 engine from a 1993
Williams Renault car was mounted mid-engine and powered the rear wheels race car semi-automatic
gearbox. The performance was electrifying 0-60 in 2.8 seconds, 0-124mph in under 7 seconds plus a
top speed of 195mph. I wouldn't mind a go in that although there was no room behind the front seats
for passengers and it apparently got a little too warm inside for an Irish war found. I'm racking
my brains to think of any memorable experience of a galactic or otherwise nature world stone in the
car. Maybe it's the way with forwards as with the Sierra it just does what it says on the tin.